doc/rescached.cfg.adoc, before:

RESCACHED.CONF(5)
=================
:doctype: manpage
:man source: rescached.cfg
:man version: 2018.08.26
:man manual: rescached.cfg


== NAME

rescached.cfg - Configuration for rescached service


== SYNOPSIS

/etc/rescached/rescached.cfg


== DESCRIPTION

These file configure the behaviour of *rescached*(1) service.
In those file you can see some comment for any option and some possible value.
This section will explain more about each option and how they effect
+rescached+.

The configuration is using INI format where each options is grouped by header
in square bracket:

* +[rescached]+
* +[log]+


== OPTIONS

=== +[rescached]+

This group of options contain the main configuration.

[[file.pid]]
==== +file.pid+

Value:: 	A path to process id file.
Format:: 	/any/path/to/file
Default:: 	rescached.pid (in current directory)
Description:: 	When +rescached+ started, it will create this file as a
mediator to any system service.
Content of this file is the process ID (PID) of +rescached+ in system.
If not set then the default name will be used, and it will be saved in current
directory where user running +rescached+.

[[server.parent]]
==== +server.parent+

Value:: 	List of parent DNS servers, separated by commas.
Format:: 	IP-ADDRESS:PORT, IP-ADDRESS:PORT, ...
Default::
* Address: 8.8.8.8, 8.8.4.4
* Port: 53
Description:: 	When +rescached+ receive a query from client and when it does
not have a cached address of query, it will pass the query to those parent
server.
+rescached+ use a Google DNS public server as a default parent address if not set.
The reason for this is that Google DNS public server use a simple and small
size of response/answer.
Please, do not use OpenDNS server.
If certain host-name not found (i.e. typo in host-name), OpenDNS will reply
with its own address, instead of replying with empty answer.
This will make +rescached+ caching a false data.
To check if your parent server reply the unknown host-name with no answer, use
*resolver*(1) tool.

[[server.parent.connection]]
==== +server.parent.connection+

Value:: Request to parent server using specific protocol.
Format:: String ("udp" or "tcp", without quotes)
Default:: udp
Description:: Type of protocol that will be used to send request to
+server.parent+.
When +rescached+ receive query from client it will forward the query to the
+server.parent+ using default protocol (UDP).
In case UDP is blocked, you can set this variable to "tcp".

[[server.listen]]
==== +server.listen+

Value:: 	Local IP address that +rescached+ will listening for client
request.
Format:: 	<IP-ADDRESS>:<PORT>
Default:: 	127.0.0.1:53
Description:: 	Address in local network where +rescached+ will listening for
query from client.
If you want rescached to serve a query from another host in your local
network, change this value to +0.0.0.0:53+.

[[server.timeout]]
==== +server.timeout+

Value:: 	Timeout value, in seconds, for writing or sending packet.
Format:: 	Number
Default:: 	6
Description:: 	This option set the server read and write timeout value.

[[cache.prune_delay]]
==== +cache.prune_delay+

Format:: 	Duration
Default:: 	5m
Description::   Every N seconds/minutes/hours, rescached will traverse all
caches and remove response that has not been accessed less than
+cache.threshold+.

[[cache.threshold]]
==== +cache.threshold+

Format:: 	Duration
Default:: 	1h
Description:: 	The duration when the cache will be considered expired.

[[debug]]
==== +debug+

Value::
0::: log nothing.
1::: log startup, request, response, caches, and exit status.
Format:: 	Number (0 or 1).
Default:: 	0
Description:: 	This option only used by developer for debugging program or if
user want to monitor what kind of traffic goes out, set this option to 1.


== EXAMPLE

Simple rescached configuration using dnscrypt-proxy that listen on port 54 as
parent resolver, with prune delay set to 60 seconds and threshold also to 60
seconds.

..............................................................................
[rescached]
server.parent=127.0.0.1:54
cache.prune_delay=60s
cache.threshold=60s
..............................................................................

Save the above script into +rescached.cfg+ and run it,

	$ sudo rescached rescached.cfg


== AUTHOR

+rescached+ is developed by M. Shulhan (ms@kilabit.info).


== LICENSE

Copyright 2018, M. Shulhan (ms@kilabit.info).
All rights reserved.

Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style license that can be found
in the LICENSE file.



== SEE ALSO

*rescached*(1)

Commit message:

Implement loading master files from directory

doc/rescached.cfg.adoc, after:

RESCACHED.CONF(5)
=================
:doctype: manpage
:man source: rescached.cfg
:man version: 2018.08.26
:man manual: rescached.cfg


== NAME

rescached.cfg - Configuration for rescached service


== SYNOPSIS

/etc/rescached/rescached.cfg


== DESCRIPTION

These file configure the behaviour of *rescached*(1) service.
In those file you can see some comment for any option and some possible value.
This section will explain more about each option and how they effect
+rescached+.

The configuration is using INI format where each options is grouped by header
in square bracket:

* +[rescached]+
* +[log]+


== OPTIONS

=== +[rescached]+

This group of options contain the main configuration.

[[file.pid]]
==== +file.pid+

Value:: 	A path to process id file.
Format:: 	/any/path/to/file
Default:: 	rescached.pid (in current directory)
Description:: 	When +rescached+ started, it will create this file as a
mediator to any system service.
Content of this file is the process ID (PID) of +rescached+ in system.
If not set then the default name will be used, and it will be saved in current
directory where user running +rescached+.

[[server.parent]]
==== +server.parent+

Value:: 	List of parent DNS servers, separated by commas.
Format:: 	IP-ADDRESS:PORT, IP-ADDRESS:PORT, ...
Default::
* Address: 8.8.8.8, 8.8.4.4
* Port: 53
Description:: 	When +rescached+ receive a query from client and when it does
not have a cached address of query, it will pass the query to those parent
server.
+rescached+ use a Google DNS public server as a default parent address if not set.
The reason for this is that Google DNS public server use a simple and small
size of response/answer.
Please, do not use OpenDNS server.
If certain host-name not found (i.e. typo in host-name), OpenDNS will reply
with its own address, instead of replying with empty answer.
This will make +rescached+ caching a false data.
To check if your parent server reply the unknown host-name with no answer, use
*resolver*(1) tool.

[[server.parent.connection]]
==== +server.parent.connection+

Value:: Request to parent server using specific protocol.
Format:: String ("udp" or "tcp", without quotes)
Default:: udp
Description:: Type of protocol that will be used to send request to
+server.parent+.
When +rescached+ receive query from client it will forward the query to the
+server.parent+ using default protocol (UDP).
In case UDP is blocked, you can set this variable to "tcp".

[[server.listen]]
==== +server.listen+

Value:: 	Local IP address that +rescached+ will listening for client
request.
Format:: 	<IP-ADDRESS>:<PORT>
Default:: 	127.0.0.1:53
Description:: 	Address in local network where +rescached+ will listening for
query from client.
If you want rescached to serve a query from another host in your local
network, change this value to +0.0.0.0:53+.

[[server.timeout]]
==== +server.timeout+

Value:: 	Timeout value, in seconds, for writing or sending packet.
Format:: 	Number
Default:: 	6
Description:: 	This option set the server read and write timeout value.

[[cache.prune_delay]]
==== +cache.prune_delay+

Format:: 	Duration
Default:: 	5m
Description::   Every N seconds/minutes/hours, rescached will traverse all
caches and remove response that has not been accessed less than
+cache.threshold+.

[[cache.threshold]]
==== +cache.threshold+

Format:: 	Duration
Default:: 	1h
Description:: 	The duration when the cache will be considered expired.

[[dir.zone]]
==== +dir.zone+

Format:: string
Default:: /etc/rescached/zone.d
Description::  Path to zone directory.
If set, rescached will load all master files inside directory.
If its empty or unset, it will skip loading zone file even in default
location.

[[debug]]
==== +debug+

Value::
0::: log nothing.
1::: log startup, request, response, caches, and exit status.
Format:: 	Number (0 or 1).
Default:: 	0
Description:: 	This option only used by developer for debugging program or if
user want to monitor what kind of traffic goes out, set this option to 1.


== EXAMPLE

Simple rescached configuration using dnscrypt-proxy that listen on port 54 as
parent resolver, with prune delay set to 60 seconds and threshold also to 60
seconds.

..............................................................................
[rescached]
server.parent=127.0.0.1:54
cache.prune_delay=60s
cache.threshold=60s
..............................................................................

Save the above script into +rescached.cfg+ and run it,

	$ sudo rescached rescached.cfg


== AUTHOR

+rescached+ is developed by M. Shulhan (ms@kilabit.info).


== LICENSE

Copyright 2018, M. Shulhan (ms@kilabit.info).
All rights reserved.

Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style license that can be found
in the LICENSE file.



== SEE ALSO

*rescached*(1)
