_doc/rescached.cfg.adoc, before:

= RESCACHED.CONF(5)
:doctype: manpage
:man source: rescached.cfg
:man version: 2020.05.10
:man manual: rescached.cfg


== NAME

rescached.cfg - Configuration for rescached service


== SYNOPSIS

/etc/rescached/rescached.cfg


== DESCRIPTION

These file configure the behaviour of *rescached*(1) service.
This section will explain more about each option and how they effect
`rescached`.

The configuration is using INI format where each options is grouped by header
in square bracket:

* `[rescached]`
* `[dns "server"]`


== OPTIONS

=== [rescached]

This group of options contain the main configuration that related to
rescached.

[#wui-listen]
==== wui.listen

Format:: [host]:port
Default:: 127.0.0.1:5380
Description:: The address to listen for web user interface.

[#file-resolvconf]
==== file.resolvconf

Format:: /any/path/to/file
Default:: /etc/rescached/resolv.conf
Description:: A path to dynamically generated *resolv.conf*(5) by
*resolvconf*(8).
+
--
If set, the nameserver values in referenced file will be used as "parent" name
server if no "parent" is defined in configuration file.

To use this config, you must set either "dnsmasq_resolv", "pdnsd_resolv", or
"unbound_conf" in "/etc/resolvconf.conf" to point to
"/etc/rescached/resolv.conf".

For example,
----
resolv_conf=/etc/resolv.conf
name_servers=127.0.0.1
dnsmasq_resolv=/etc/rescached/resolv.conf
#pdnsd_resolv=/etc/rescached/resolv.conf
#unbound_conf=/etc/rescached/resolv.conf
----
--

[#debug]
==== debug

Value::
0::: log startup and errors.
1::: log startup, errors, request, response, caches, and exit status.
Format:: 	Number (0 or 1).
Default:: 	0
Description:: 	This option only used for debugging program or if user want to
monitor what kind of traffic goes in and out of rescached.

[#dns_server]
=== [dns "server"]

This group of options related to DNS server.

[#parent]
==== parent

Format::

----
parent  = "parent = " [ scheme "://"] ( ip-address / domain-name ) [ ":" port ]
scheme  = ( "udp" / "https")
----

Default::
* Address: udp://1.1.1.1
* Port: 53
Description:: List of parent DNS servers.
+
When `rescached` receive a query from client (for example, your browser) and
when it does not have a cached answer for that query, it will forward the
query to one of the parent name servers.
+
Using UDP as parent scheme, will automatically assume that the server also
capable of handling query in TCP.
This is required when client (for example, your browser) re-send the query
after receiving truncated UDP answer.
Any query received by `rescached` through TCP will forwarded to the parent
name server as TCP too, using the same address and port defined in one of UDP
parent.
+
Please, do not use OpenDNS server.
If certain host-name not found (i.e. typo in host-name), OpenDNS will reply
with its own address, instead of replying with empty answer.
This will make `rescached` caching a false data and it may make your
application open or consume unintended resources.
+
To check if your parent server reply the unknown host-name with no answer, use
*resolver*(1) tool.

Example::
----
## Using UDP connection to forward request to parent name server.
parent = udp://1.1.1.1

## Using DNS over TLS to forward request to parent name server.
parent = https://1.1.1.1

## Using DNS over HTTPS to forward request to parent name server.
parent = https://kilabit.info/dns-query
----

[#listen]
==== listen

Format:: 	<IP-ADDRESS>:<PORT>
Default:: 	127.0.0.1:53
Description:: 	Address in local network where `rescached` will listening for
query from client.
+
If you want rescached to serve a query from another host in your local
network, change this value to `0.0.0.0:53`.

[#http-port]
==== http.port

Format:: Number
Default:: 443
Description:: Port to serve DNS over HTTP.

[#tls-port]
==== tls.port

Format:: Number
Default:: 853
Description:: Port to serve DNS over TLS.

[#tls-certificate]
==== tls.certificate

Format:: /path/to/file
Default:: (empty)
Description:: Path to certificate file to serve DNS over TLS and HTTPS.


[#tls-private_key]
==== tls.private_key

Format:: /path/to/file
Default:: (empty)
Description:: Path to certificate private key file to serve DNS over TLS and
HTTPS.

[#tls-allow_insecure]
==== tls.allow_insecure

Format:: true | false
Default:: false
Description:: If its true, allow serving DoH and DoT with self-signed
certificate.

[#doh-behind_proxy]
==== doh.behind_proxy

Format:: true | false
Default:: false
Description:: If its true, serve DNS over HTTP only, even if
certificate files is defined.
This allow serving DNS request forwarded by another proxy server.

[#cache-prune_delay]
==== cache.prune_delay

Format:: 	Duration with time unit. Valid time units are "s", "m", "h".
Default:: 	1h
Description::   Delay for pruning caches.
+
Every N seconds/minutes/hours, rescached will traverse all
caches and remove response that has not been accessed less than
`cache.prune_threshold`.
Its value must be equal or greater than 1 hour (3600 seconds).

[#cache-prune_threshold]
==== cache.prune_threshold

Format:: 	Duration with time unit. Valid time units are "s", "m", "h".
Default:: 	-1h
Description:: 	The duration when the cache will be considered expired.
Its value must be negative and greater or equal than -1 hour (-3600 seconds).

== FILES

[#hosts-d]
=== /etc/rescached/hosts.d

Path to hosts directory where rescached will load all hosts formatted files.


[#zone-d]
=== /etc/rescached/zone.d

Path to zone directory where rescached will load all zone files.


== EXAMPLE

Simple rescached configuration using dnscrypt-proxy that listen on port 54 as
parent resolver, with prune delay set to 60 seconds and threshold also to 60
seconds.

----
[dns "server"]
parent=udp://127.0.0.1:54
cache.prune_delay=60s
cache.prune_threshold=60s
----

Save the above script into `rescached.cfg` and run it,

	$ sudo rescached -config rescached.cfg


== AUTHOR

`rescached` is developed by M. Shulhan (m.shulhan@gmail.com).


== LICENSE

Copyright 2018, M. Shulhan (m.shulhan@gmail.com).
All rights reserved.

Use of this source code is governed by a BSD-style license that can be found
in the LICENSE file.


== SEE ALSO

*rescached*(1)

Commit message:

all: change the rescached license to GPL 3.0 or later
See https://kilabit.info/journal/2022/gpl/ for more information.

_doc/rescached.cfg.adoc, after:

// SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2020 M. Shulhan <ms@kilabit.info>
// SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
= RESCACHED.CONF(5)
:doctype: manpage
:man source: rescached.cfg
:man version: 2020.05.10
:man manual: rescached.cfg


== NAME

rescached.cfg - Configuration for rescached service


== SYNOPSIS

/etc/rescached/rescached.cfg


== DESCRIPTION

These file configure the behaviour of *rescached*(1) service.
This section will explain more about each option and how they effect
`rescached`.

The configuration is using INI format where each options is grouped by header
in square bracket:

* `[rescached]`
* `[dns "server"]`


== OPTIONS

=== [rescached]

This group of options contain the main configuration that related to
rescached.

[#wui-listen]
==== wui.listen

Format:: [host]:port
Default:: 127.0.0.1:5380
Description:: The address to listen for web user interface.

[#file-resolvconf]
==== file.resolvconf

Format:: /any/path/to/file
Default:: /etc/rescached/resolv.conf
Description:: A path to dynamically generated *resolv.conf*(5) by
*resolvconf*(8).
+
--
If set, the nameserver values in referenced file will be used as "parent" name
server if no "parent" is defined in configuration file.

To use this config, you must set either "dnsmasq_resolv", "pdnsd_resolv", or
"unbound_conf" in "/etc/resolvconf.conf" to point to
"/etc/rescached/resolv.conf".

For example,
----
resolv_conf=/etc/resolv.conf
name_servers=127.0.0.1
dnsmasq_resolv=/etc/rescached/resolv.conf
#pdnsd_resolv=/etc/rescached/resolv.conf
#unbound_conf=/etc/rescached/resolv.conf
----
--

[#debug]
==== debug

Value::
0::: log startup and errors.
1::: log startup, errors, request, response, caches, and exit status.
Format:: 	Number (0 or 1).
Default:: 	0
Description:: 	This option only used for debugging program or if user want to
monitor what kind of traffic goes in and out of rescached.

[#dns_server]
=== [dns "server"]

This group of options related to DNS server.

[#parent]
==== parent

Format::

----
parent  = "parent = " [ scheme "://"] ( ip-address / domain-name ) [ ":" port ]
scheme  = ( "udp" / "https")
----

Default::
* Address: udp://1.1.1.1
* Port: 53
Description:: List of parent DNS servers.
+
When `rescached` receive a query from client (for example, your browser) and
when it does not have a cached answer for that query, it will forward the
query to one of the parent name servers.
+
Using UDP as parent scheme, will automatically assume that the server also
capable of handling query in TCP.
This is required when client (for example, your browser) re-send the query
after receiving truncated UDP answer.
Any query received by `rescached` through TCP will forwarded to the parent
name server as TCP too, using the same address and port defined in one of UDP
parent.
+
Please, do not use OpenDNS server.
If certain host-name not found (i.e. typo in host-name), OpenDNS will reply
with its own address, instead of replying with empty answer.
This will make `rescached` caching a false data and it may make your
application open or consume unintended resources.
+
To check if your parent server reply the unknown host-name with no answer, use
*resolver*(1) tool.

Example::
----
## Using UDP connection to forward request to parent name server.
parent = udp://1.1.1.1

## Using DNS over TLS to forward request to parent name server.
parent = https://1.1.1.1

## Using DNS over HTTPS to forward request to parent name server.
parent = https://kilabit.info/dns-query
----

[#listen]
==== listen

Format:: 	<IP-ADDRESS>:<PORT>
Default:: 	127.0.0.1:53
Description:: 	Address in local network where `rescached` will listening for
query from client.
+
If you want rescached to serve a query from another host in your local
network, change this value to `0.0.0.0:53`.

[#http-port]
==== http.port

Format:: Number
Default:: 443
Description:: Port to serve DNS over HTTP.

[#tls-port]
==== tls.port

Format:: Number
Default:: 853
Description:: Port to serve DNS over TLS.

[#tls-certificate]
==== tls.certificate

Format:: /path/to/file
Default:: (empty)
Description:: Path to certificate file to serve DNS over TLS and HTTPS.


[#tls-private_key]
==== tls.private_key

Format:: /path/to/file
Default:: (empty)
Description:: Path to certificate private key file to serve DNS over TLS and
HTTPS.

[#tls-allow_insecure]
==== tls.allow_insecure

Format:: true | false
Default:: false
Description:: If its true, allow serving DoH and DoT with self-signed
certificate.

[#doh-behind_proxy]
==== doh.behind_proxy

Format:: true | false
Default:: false
Description:: If its true, serve DNS over HTTP only, even if
certificate files is defined.
This allow serving DNS request forwarded by another proxy server.

[#cache-prune_delay]
==== cache.prune_delay

Format:: 	Duration with time unit. Valid time units are "s", "m", "h".
Default:: 	1h
Description::   Delay for pruning caches.
+
Every N seconds/minutes/hours, rescached will traverse all
caches and remove response that has not been accessed less than
`cache.prune_threshold`.
Its value must be equal or greater than 1 hour (3600 seconds).

[#cache-prune_threshold]
==== cache.prune_threshold

Format:: 	Duration with time unit. Valid time units are "s", "m", "h".
Default:: 	-1h
Description:: 	The duration when the cache will be considered expired.
Its value must be negative and greater or equal than -1 hour (-3600 seconds).

== FILES

[#hosts-d]
=== /etc/rescached/hosts.d

Path to hosts directory where rescached will load all hosts formatted files.


[#zone-d]
=== /etc/rescached/zone.d

Path to zone directory where rescached will load all zone files.


== EXAMPLE

Simple rescached configuration using dnscrypt-proxy that listen on port 54 as
parent resolver, with prune delay set to 60 seconds and threshold also to 60
seconds.

----
[dns "server"]
parent=udp://127.0.0.1:54
cache.prune_delay=60s
cache.prune_threshold=60s
----

Save the above script into `rescached.cfg` and run it,

	$ sudo rescached -config rescached.cfg


== AUTHOR

`rescached` is developed by M. Shulhan (m.shulhan@gmail.com).


== LICENSE

Copyright 2018, M. Shulhan (m.shulhan@gmail.com).
All rights reserved.

Use of this source code is governed by a GPL-3.0 license that can be
found in the COPYING file.


== SEE ALSO

*rescached*(1)
